Ngā Whetū e Iwa o Matariki
The Nine Stars of Matariki

Matariki is a star cluster that appears in the early morning sky in New Zealand during the mid-winter months. The star cluster is well known throughout the world and can be seen around the globe at different times of the year. It is one of the brightest clusters in the sky, containing hundreds of member stars, nine distinguishable to the naked eye. Matariki has different names around the world. In English, it is often called by its ancient Greek name, the Pleiades or the Seven Sisters (the nine stars also include the sisters’ parents, Atlas and Pleione). In Hawaiian it is Makali’i, ‘eyes of royalty’, and in Japan it is Subaru, meaning ‘gathered together’. The name Matariki seems to be derived from ‘ngā mata o te ariki o Tāwhirimātea’, the eyes of the weather god Tāwhirimatea.

The reappearance of the Matariki star cluster during mid-winter signals the beginning of the Māori New Year. Traditionally, Matariki festivities included lighting ritual fires, making offerings and various celebrations to farewell the dead, honour ancestors and celebrate life. Nowadays, people all across Aotearoa come together to remember their ancestors, share kai (food), sing waiata (songs), tell stories and play music. Matariki is about reconnecting with your home and whānau (family). Some iwi (tribes) are unable to see Matariki from their rohe (region), and herald the new year with another star named Puanga (Rigel). Each of the whētu (stars) in the cluster is intrinsically connected, and they’re individually named and defined with a purpose.

Matariki (Alcyone)
Matariki is known as the mother of the eight other stars in the constellation. Matariki is connected to health and wellbeing and is often viewed as a sign of good fortune or health to come in the following year. If the cluster and the Matariki star is bright and high in the sky, it is a signal of wellbeing, peace, and good luck for observers.
You can look upon this star to set your intentions of prioritizing your health and wellbeing. This could mean considering joining a gym or taking up mindful practices such as meditation.

Pōhutukawa (Sterope)
Pōhutukawa is connected to the dead and those who have passed away in the past year. In Māori belief, the spirit leaves the body when a person dies, and then journeys along the pathway of spirits known as Te Ara Wairua. This journey ends at the tip of the North Island at Te Rerenga Wairua where an ancient Pōhutukawa tree stands on a rocky ledge towards the ocean. The spirits then descend the aka (root) of the tree entering the underworld.
You can look upon this star in reflection and remembrance of loved ones who have passed.

Tupu-ā-nuku (Pleione)
Tupuānuku is associated with food grown in the ground. This star is looked upon during the month of May to indicate that the summer harvest has ended, and winter is near.
You can look upon this star and set an intention to get out into your vege garden. June is a great time to plant winter vegetables such as spinach, silver beet, lettuce, onions, and peas. Homegrown kai (food) that can be shared with whānau (family) and friends.

Tupu-ā-rangi (Atlas)
Tupuārangi is associated with food that comes from the sky and is linked to birds. Traditionally kererū (wood pigeons) were harvested around this time. It is also connected to the harvesting of elevated foods such as berries and fruits.
Look upon this star to find inspiration for your five plus a day. Winter berries and fruits can be harvested around this time, such as kiwifruit, fejoia, lemons, limes, oranges, mandarins, and passionfruit. Try collecting this fresh kai (food) and sharing with your community, whānau (family) and friends.

Waitī (Maia)
Waitī is connected to fresh water and living creatures in the rivers, streams, and lakes. Waitī is the twin of Waitā.
You can look upon this star in recognition and appreciation of our fresh waters in Aotearoa. It is a great time to set intentions to help preserve our freshwater ways, such as not wasting water or joining community stream cleaning events.

Waitā (Taygeta)
Waitā is associated with the ocean and represents food gathered from the sea. This star is also significant for its influences over tides and floodwaters. Waitā is the twin of Waitī.
You can look upon this star to set intentions of protecting our salt waters and living creatures within. This can involve practicing environmentally sustainable practices such as conserving water, reducing waste and fishing responsibly.

Waipuna-ā-rangi (Electra)
Waipunaārangi is connected to the rain. The name itself means ‘water that pools in the sky’.
You can look upon this star in reflection and recognition of how vital fresh rainfall is to life on earth.

Ururangi (Merope)
Ururangi is connected to the wind. The name means ‘the winds of the sky’. Traditionally used to forecast the nature of the wind for the year to come.

Hiwa-i-te-rangi (Celaeno)
Hiwaiterangi is connected to the promise of a prosperous season. It is also known as the wishing star. Māori traditionally use this star to set their desires and dreams for the year, commonly known now as New Year’s resolutions.
You can look upon this star to set goals and resolutions for the year to come.

Mānawatia a Matariki!